# precursor_mass_corrections
Explores precursor mass correction algorithm assumptions and claims

---

## What does this have to do with precursor mass tolerances?

Narrow tolerance searches have many complications. Incorrect precursor mass and charge assignments strongly affect narrow tolerance searches. The classic case that is mentioned the most is when the monoisotopic peak is not correctly determined. The most common error is assigning the first isotopic peak (the M1 peak) as the monoisotopic peak. I will refer to the instrument picking the M1 peak instead of the monoisotopic peak as an **M1 trigger**. Search engines recognize that this can happen and many have options to try various 1.0003 mass shifts to mimic incorrect monoisotopic peak calls. The options in Comet are -1, 0, 1, 2, and 3 times the 1.0003 neutron mass. This means that instead of one plus/minus 10 PPM window at 0-Da to define theoretical peptides to score, you use five 10 PPM windows located at the isotopic peak positions. This is a nice solution because you do not have to analyze the data in the MS1 scans to verify precursor mass and charge assignments. The cost is 5 times the search time.

An alternative, if you want to muck about with the MS1 scans, is to find monoisotopic mass errors and/or incorrect charge state assignments associated with the precursors and correct the precursor information for the MS2 scans. This requires running an extra algorithmic step in your pipeline and its time penalty has to be compared to the increased search times from trying isotopic peak shifts. At some level, these seem like similar ways to address the same problem.

## Brief overview

Instruments have to try and determine the monoisotopic precursor mass and precursor charge state in real time during acquisition. This associates an m/z value and charge for the dependent MS2 scans. This is used by search engines to restrict the theoretical peptides to score against the MS2 spectrum. Inaccuracies in the precursor calls can negatively impact search engine performance. If peak spacings of the isotopic distribution of the precursor are not determined correctly, a charge state error can be made. This happens when precursor signals are weak and peaks in the isotopic envelope may be missing.

The true monoisotopic peak (the first one in the isotopic envelope) may be missed and the M1 peak incorrectly assigned as the monoisotopic peak (a +1.0003 Da mass error). As peptides get larger the monoisotopic peak gets smaller and the M1 peak gets larger. Above some mass, the M1 peak is the larger peak. When large peptides are low abundance, the monoisotopic peak can easily get lost. It is also not clear if instruments are doing much to define isotopic envelopes or if they just grab the most intense peak in a series of charge-spaced peaks. Generally speaking, peptide size and change state are correlated - higher charge states are probably larger peptides. We might expect M1 triggers to be more common for higher charge state peptides.

Instruments can have mass calibration errors. These can be small, systematic errors that can be recognized in post processing and software corrected by search engines if they are sophisticated enough. Many instruments have hardware mass calibration stabilization. Known contaminant ions (or using special calibrant ions) can be sampled and the instrument tune corrected to make the masses spot on. This has limited correction power and instruments with larger systematic calibration errors can bump up against the correction range limit. This results in some scans getting mass corrections (when the delta is within limits) and some scans left uncorrected (with the larger systematic mass error). This creates deltamass doublets (two peaks instead of one). It is not clear if any software mass correction algorithms are coded for this situation.

There is another complication that has become a bigger problem over time. Less peptide separation has been a growing trend. Single shot experiments (one LC run per sample) have gotten more popular as instrument scan speeds have improved. Multi-dimensional peptide separations can be complicated for chromatography alignment algorithms. Shorter LC gradients make for shorter run times and increase throughput. All of these factors make it more likely that isolation windows (selecting ions to fragment) will have multiple peptide species. Older quadrupoles had isolation windows of about 2 Da. Newer instruments can select ions with good transmission at 0.7 Da (or narrower). The isolation windows are still enormous compared to the precursor resolution.

Co-isolation and co-fragmentation is a complicated problem to address. Many times multiple precursors means more than two. The precursors may have the same or different charge states and be are rather different relative intensities. The precursor window and the fragment ion spectra may be more like a DIA experiment than you think.

This is also coupled with dynamic exclusion. Dynamic exclusion used to be a real sledge hammer for driving finish nails. It was not too long ago that -1 Da to +4 Da were the kinds of dynamic exclusion windows that were blacked out after taking an MS2 scan. You could easily have more than half of the m/z space being excluded with fast scanning instruments. It was also very dynamic as masses go on and off of the exclusion list in rapid order.

Now the dynamic exclusion is high res with plus/minus 20 PPM in notches over the isotopic envelope. For this to work, the instrument has to be able to determine an isotopic envelope with some fidelity. An M1 trigger does not really affect this, but the charge state call is important. Since the instrument can exclude a precursor with pretty tight mass tolerances, a very similar mass peptide could be selected for an MS2 scan while an excluded peptide is still present. The instrument might co-isolate multiple precursors on purpose. The better dynamic exclusion works, the more problematic data you collect. You can get multiple precursors isolated together. You can get down to ions at the noise level because everything else has already been analyzed. It will be harder to determine isotopic envelopes for weaker ion signals.    

## Recent papers describing algorithms to correct precursor mass and charge state calls

[iPE-MMR paper](https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/ac101388b?casa_token=s-zCv8N-G94AAAAA%3A123WZzrHgydnHfdqIzn4X3Msc0PGXWa4LFcopnIY0wlMxDokL6q1hvPzA4ez5jZSLygMp-O5fuVdDw&)

> Jung, H.J., Purvine, S.O., Kim, H., Petyuk, V.A., Hyung, S.W., Monroe, M.E., Mun, D.G., Kim, K.C., Park, J.M., Kim, S.J. and Tolic, N., 2010. Integrated post-experiment monoisotopic mass refinement: an integrated approach to accurately assign monoisotopic precursor masses to tandem mass spectrometric data. Analytical chemistry, 82(20), pp.8510-8518.

[RawConverter paper](https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/acs.analchem.5b02721?casa_token=VO-i__7ztykAAAAA:KaEBW25jSsiQmqcvzdtsd7DueCfeuHgEDvr1ZXv4Ymwq9y8JRK0arNHh_tjzm0Aaybsqh9a8NsK-7g)


> He, L., Diedrich, J., Chu, Y.Y. and Yates III, J.R., 2015. Extracting accurate precursor information for tandem mass spectra by RawConverter. Analytical chemistry, 87(22), pp.11361-11367.

[Monocle paper](https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/acs.jproteome.0c00563?casa_token=DzzesZv3fdAAAAAA:sDuBKpnjXwAlfU2A0G77wXOV0MDScWCLznDIxhWM5OZe7ONWKvtCEE2KP556moITh3uYA2QzEjor_w)

> Rad, R., Li, J., Mintseris, J., O’Connell, J., Gygi, S.P. and Schweppe, D.K., 2020. Improved Monoisotopic Mass Estimation for Deeper Proteome Coverage. Journal of Proteome Research, 20(1), pp.591-598.

All of these papers talk up how the instruments can't get anything right (as mentioned above) and that you get huge gains by using these algorithms. They also like to pick on each other. Being good, skeptical scientists, we should have several questions: are the instruments doing as poorly as suggested? What is the break down on what is broken? How successful are the fixes? How was success defined? How huge is huge? What problem are these algorithms really solving?

They all suffer from some similar issues. They all state (assume) the problems in monoisotopic mass and charge calls are large without demonstrating (in some direct way) that the problems are large. They do not separate and quantify the types of errors in the test datasets and test the algorithm performance on each type of error (an M1 trigger, multiple precursors, etc.). Degree of peptide separation was not explored. More separation usually improves signal-to-noise for precursors (because more sample can be loaded) and reduces the chances for co-eluting peptides. These factors are pretty important to the assumed reasons for using said algorithms. They do not tally what fraction of precursors lack enough information to make corrections. Interestingly, Thermo has acquisition methods that acquire MS2 scans on anything it can if all higher quality precursors have been exhausted and there is still time available in the cycle.

The common way to evaluate an MS1 peak processing algorithm is indirectly by seeing how many peptides and proteins a search engine can identify with and without the algorithm corrections. The first issue is that counting PSMs is the only thing you need to count. The numbers of identified peptide sequences and identified proteins is linearly correlated with the PSM count. Comparing identified peptides and proteins is much more complicated (and dicy) than comparing PSMs and likely causes more confusion than anything. The other issue is that there is a lot of data processing between the MS2 scan and the PSM counting. You have protein database choices, search engine choices, search engine parameter choices, post processing of search scores, target/decoy FDR methods, and protein inference. There is an implied assumption that a narrow tolerance search is the only thing worth evaluating. True wide tolerance searches were not tried in any of these papers.

While improving PSM identifications at the end of the day is obviously a desirable goal, such an indirect evaluation method sheds little light on the correction algorithms. What are the precursor error characteristics of the data before and after the running the algorithms? Did the algorithms offer advantages over applying the similar fixes built into the search engines (isotopic errors, deamidation, etc.)? All of the papers showed that PSM numbers could be improved when using narrow tolerance searches without really answering the questions of how and why. A low level algorithm should be evaluated at a low level if you really want to understand the problem and its solution.  
